May 1980

At eight, I like feeling the top half of my body suspended in mid-air, my bent knees pressed against the metal. I like the moment when I squeeze my eyes tight shut, let go and let the vertigo pass through me. When my hands are flat on the black asphalt, it means I've gone past my fear. And then the image of my favorite gymnast, Nadia Comăneci, comes to me. Her arms wide open. Victory.

It's in the 'bat hang' position that I spend recess, that I wait for Ana, my sister. This morning, when she left, she said, See you here, and on time, okay? Otherwise I'm going home alone. 'Here' is at the foot of the stairs, near the metal bar that separates the parking lot from the schoolyard.



Ilaria! Get down from there! We're going to Chez Léon. Come on, let's go!

I recognize Papa's voice. Surprised, I lift the flap of my dress that's blocking my view. Yes, it's the tips of his shoes, yes, it's his impatient tone. I do a pirouette, land on my feet, smooth my dress.

Ana's coming.

No, no. Plans have changed. Maman is picking her up from school and we're all meeting at Chez Léon. Come on!

I grab his hand, it's clammy.



Since our parents separated and Papa moved to Turin, we see each other once a month at the restaurant. Maman is the one behind the idea. She prefers a neutral place. She says at home they argue too loud. And it's true that at Chez Léon, they hold back. Even if Papa clenches his jaw and Maman looks off into the distance with an indifferent air.





No, Papa still hasn't found a job. When he says 'no-not-any-work' his voice is sad, tired. Maman turns her head a little to hide her smile and Papa gets angry. He repeats the word 'humiliation'. Luckily the waiter comes and sets plates of perch fillets or dishes of meringues with whipped cream on the table. Thank you.

After dessert, Ana and I leave the table and on the little beach, pick out pebbles. We practice skipping them.

Did you see?

What?

Papa took Maman's hand.



To get to Chez Léon, we go through the village of Hermance, cross the French-Swiss border and continue on the road to Yvoire. Papa has a navy-blue BMW, a 320 coupe.

If you see a phone booth, tell me. He lights a cigarette. There! He stops, gets out of the car and takes coins out of his trouser pocket. With his back pressed to the glass, the folds of his shirt trace Vs, Ws. I wait, roll down the window, let a little air in. The leather seat no longer burns the backs of my thighs, it's even soft when I stroke it with the palm of my hand.

In the booth, Papa speaks loudly, raises his voice, turns around. Our eyes meet. He smiles, looks down. From the way he moves his hands I can tell he's agitated. His body is stiff. It worries me. When he comes back, he says Maman has changed her mind and doesn't have time for lunch anymore. We'll spend the weekend together. And school? You'll only miss a few days of school... It's not that serious.





Papa's voice is sharp. I count on my fingertips: Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Four days. And Ana? I'd like to protest but when Papa is nervous, it's better to keep quiet.

He starts the car abruptly and crushes his cigarette with a curt gesture. His forehead is covered in sweat.


Mont Blanc Tunnel, French-Italian border, tunnel vaults, Val d'Aosta switchbacks, carsickness. We stop under a sky covered with a grey sheet. The landscape is metallic. I throw up by the side of the road, Papa hands me a white cotton handkerchief. Let's have something to drink, it'll make you feel better. A few kilometres farther down, in the service-station bar, Papa's face is pale. It must be because of the neon lights. He pays the cashier for two slices of Margherita pizza, a whisky, a coffee and a lemonade. I hate lemonade but say nothing, my mouth is dry.

Do you have any phone tokens you can sell me?

How many?

About twenty.

The cashier carefully counts the yellowish pieces and hands them to Papa.

The booth is outside, on the left.

Her nails are very long and covered in very red polish. I follow Papa.

What are those tokens?

I need them to make a call. In Italy you can't put coins in phone booths.



Between Geneva and Turin, Papa makes several calls. Five in all. Whenever he sees a service station, he stops. Are you happy to spend the weekend with me? Lost your tongue? What are you thinking about? Nothing.




Turin. We drive around for a long time looking for somewhere to park and when Papa pushes the door of his building open with his shoulder, he looks relieved. I race up the stairs. What floor is it on? The fourth. On the landing he looks for his keys. You're going to see your room. Are you happy? I say yes. Yes, I'm happy. Listen, Ilaria, he turns the key in the lock, I have to introduce you to someone I haven't told you about yet, a certain Geneviève. Who's that? The lady of the house. Papa opens the door and points to an inanimate mannequin dressed in a black dress with a white lace collar and a hat. He bursts out laughing. Geneviève's face is white polystyrene, it has no eyes. Come on! Come in. Your room is at the back, past the bathroom.

Impatient to see it, I take a quick look at the other rooms and switch on the light in my bedroom. The space is crammed with two beds and two dressers. I go over to the Topolino poster. Mickey looks at me with eyes shaped like tunnels. Papa stays in the doorway.

I still haven't found pretty bedside lamps. We can buy some together tomorrow, can't we? If you want. Running my hand over the fabric, I ask him if they're the sheets from Florence.



Do you remember?

I think so, yes. When was Florence?

Two years ago.

Orange sunflower patterns stand out on the sheets. They remind me of the blurry images I still have from that time. Two years and yet I feel as if it's been centuries since Maman, Ana and I moved to Switzerland.




The next day we wake up early and go for a giro, a drive around Turin. Papa tells me about the kingdom of FIAT, the workers' strikes, the arrival of immigrants from the South. He says the people of Turin hate them.

Through the windshield he points out the palazzi, the Po, the Basilica of Superga, the statues. Do you see the kids over there between the cars, they're posteggiatori. That's how they make money, helping people park.

When we walk under the arcades of Corso Vittorio Emanuele, Papa holds my hand tight, his is always clammy, and I don't dare pull mine away until, in front of the Al Sogno toy-shop window, I let go.


The display window looks like a zoo of harmless animals. Even the snakes look kind. Papa follows my gaze. Is it the teddy bear you're looking at? Come on, let's buy it. The shop is full of wooden toys, mobiles, dolls in sparkling dresses. I'm enchanted. And for Ana? What should we get her? Yes, a doll... Ana loves them. The one I choose has very long eyelashes and when you lay her down, her eyelids close. While the saleswoman wraps it in pretty gift paper, Papa holds out the teddy bear to me. What do we call him? What do you think of Birillo? Yes. I look at Birillo and right away adopt his bright milk-chocolate eyes, his cream belly, his soft fur. Papa pinches my cheek between his index and middle finger, his eyes all soft.

That touch on my cheek is like his signature. He will repeat it for two years and I will end up hating it. Are you happy?





At eight, I am a quiet, obedient child, rather skinny. I do not complain when Papa leaves me alone in the apartment to go make his phone calls at Chez Carmelo, the bar downstairs. He doesn't have a telephone. I'll be right back. He always promises he'll only be 'two minutes.' Alone, lying on my bed, I draw, stick Sarah Kay stickers in my new album. Papa bought it for me at the newsstand. And when I get tired of waiting for him, I know where to find him: at the counter. My landmark is the big coffee machine that gives off the smell of burnt caramel.

At Chez Carmelo, the local workers come in to eat a sandwich at noon or have a drink before going home. They all have first names and their own habits. Una birra alla spina per Emilio e due tramezzini per Marco. Gianna is the owner. She punches the big keys on the till very fast. Sei mila lire. Perched on her little platform, she smiles, hands over the scontrini, the receipts, the packs of cigarettes, and when there is no one there, she sweeps the floor. Carmelo, meanwhile, polishes the counter, serves coffees, dries the glasses with a dish towel, evens out the sugar in the sugar bowls.





When I go into the cafe, the place is lively. The workers sing together to a song on the radio. Vorrei essere libero, libero come un uomo. To reach the counter I slip between them and hoist myself up onto the tall stool. Listen, listen! It's a song by Giorgio Gaber, La libertà. Carmelo laughs and I see metal spots at the back of his mouth. How many cavities? I don't have time to count them. Are you looking for Fulvio? He points to the telephone booth with his hand covered in soap bubbles.

And how was your day? Very good. Tomorrow we're going back to Geneva. You'll come back soon, won't you? Carmelo's smile is gentle. I'll be very sad not to see you anymore. Promise? I promise.

Later Papa appears. His legs are all stiff. With his strange face, he bends down to my ear. We're leaving tonight. His breath is like a draft. Hurry up. We have to go upstairs and pack our bags.

Say goodbye to Carmelo and Gianna and thank them properly.



In the back seat of the car, I can barely breathe. Where are we going? By the sea. And Ana? And Maman? When do we see them again? Stop sniffling. We'll go back to Geneva in a month. A month's not long. And the end-of-year ceremony? You told me we'd only spend the weekend together... You'll go next year. Stop with your questions now.

The image of the pretty dress I chose with Maman for the parade appears. I think of Sarah, my best friend, of my teacher, of the little flag we put together in class, of Ana. My head is heavy. I tuck my knees under my chin and press Birillo tight against me. My sleep is cold, restless.





I want to hear your voice. STOP. The little one is well. STOP. She would like to speak to you. STOP. I am waiting for you. STOP. Wait for me.

Your husband



Here! Put this in the glove compartment.

Now we stop not just at phone booths but at post offices too. Papa sends piles of telegrams and keeps a copy. I don't dare read them when he hands them to me, but I'm curious — I steady my hands, slow them down, to catch a few words.



Zzaaak, zzzaaak. A family, a man alone, a woman. Two white mops of hair doing 30 km/h in the right lane. Papa gets impatient, lets go of the wheel, lights a cigarette. Come on!!! Let me through. He slaloms between the vehicles. Are you scared? A little. He notices my hand clenched on the door handle. Traffic thickens at the entrance to Genova, tunnel after tunnel. Shadow-light, shadow-light. The lanes are full of cars and long trucks. I can't stand this road anymore. Get the map out, Ilaria.



Genova, Milano, Brescia, Alessandria. Yes, Brescia, then we'll go to Alessandria. I trace our route with my fingertip. But there's no sea in Alessandria! Doesn't matter. I'm showing you your country. Papa's tone is playful. He's this close to winking at me.

Papa shifts down and takes the exit for the service station.

I have to make a call, go to the bar.

No, I'm staying here.

While I wait for him, I hop around the booth on one foot. Papa slides the tokens into the slot, lights a cigarette. Pronto? The call goes on.





Sitting in the car, I leave the door open, swing my legs in the air. The sky is streaked white, the clouds like balls of yarn. The air is heavy, I'm thirsty and hot. Other cars arrive, leave, back up in the parking lot. Kids run. Careful, look before you cross! their mothers shout. The families filing past look perfect to me, washed, combed, ironed, they are going somewhere specific. Where are we going?



Roads, phone booths, post offices, little hotels, bars. The days pile up. We often stop in the Autogrills to fill up, eat a sandwich, go to the toilet. I like those places. Inside, everything is colorful: stacks of candy, baskets of food wrapped in crinkly paper, bins of music cassettes, games, stuffed animals. And while I drift among the aisles, Papa talks with customers at the bar counter.

He loves talking.

He can't help it, he has to talk to someone. Anyone.

And he is very good at striking up a conversation. It always starts with a remark about the traffic or the weather or a joke. Papa knows how to put even the shyest people at ease. He looks at home, the way he leans on the counter, the way he talks to the barman. When he clowns around, he's quickly surrounded by smiling faces. I prefer seeing him like that, happy, with his laughing eyes, rather than having to listen to his theories about people.





Yes, yes, we're going. Always one last drink. He drinks fast, and when he grabs his glass I'm sure that even if he were blind, he'd have the same certainty. His lips would tremble just the same. He seems afraid he won't have time to finish his whisky.

One day he told me it's medicine for him, and pinched my cheek.

Say thank you. I thank the barman, say goodbye to each of them.

On the road again. We leave the bar just like that, abruptly.