To loss.

And also — to the birds.



Cherry


Dunaj howls. And they are here already, just as I remember them — hungry, restless. They glint as if their wings had been doused in petrol, violet, blue, red, yellow shimmering on them.

The flock wheels over the village.

June has taken in a great deal of sun; already at its beginning the fruit of the cherry trees is sweet.

Grandfather, who avoids grandmother's illness, to whom the rituals of the illness are foreign, who wants to know nothing about the illness and touch nothing in the illness, watches from the veranda as the starlings dip low over the orchard.

He strikes an aluminum milk churn with a metal rod. It booms through the valley.

I watch him. It must be booming inside him too, his body trembles, his skin is like the skin of men who inhabit the Carpathian Arc, I think. Bronze. Ebony.

The starlings burst into flight, a deluge of them. As they pass over the house, they cast a shadow on the floor of the western room, the one the cast-iron stove warms in the cold months.

A moment later they come back over the orchard.

They are stubborn.

More blows on the metal set them twitching nervously. The booming keeps them in the air.

Grandfather pauses for a cigarette. They take advantage of the silence and land in the broad-canopied tree. They stuff their small bodies with fruit.

They have already learned to recognize silence, I say to Ann.

Yes, she says yes.




Ann is the brightness here. She is interested in light and is light herself. This morning she arrived here, straight into warm Maj, from a far country. The journey is still in her. The smell of elsewhere is still in her — freesia, patchouli. She stands with me on the veranda and lets her eyes adjust to early summer.

Her eyes follow the light.

Ann knows light.

Studies light.

Hunts light.

Divines from light.

I touch her throat with my fingers, where constellations of moles grow.

Ann says, We have to count them.

All right, I answer.

As a child I counted grandmother's moles. She hid little from me. She let me count the tiny dots that covered her back, and also the ones around her breasts. She let my gaze into places like the shell of her ear or the crooks of her elbows.

You too are of my body, she used to say.

We go from the veranda into the western room. The melody grandfather plays can be heard. Grandmother watches the shadow of the flock. She lifts her wasted hand as if volunteering an answer.

There, she says, and points to the wardrobe.

She asks me to take the summer dresses out of it. This surprises me. Every day she wears the pajamas I buy her at the market in the nearby town of Stary Sad. She likes the powder-mint ones.

I spread the dresses out on the daybed.

That one, grandmother whispers.

She has chosen the one the color of blood. I take it in my hands. It is velvet.

Take it to him, she asks.

I do it without a word of protest.




Grandfather finishes smoking another club on the veranda — out of nostalgia for what is gone, he calls every cigarette that, and I have taken it from him. He takes the dress in his hands. His skin catches on the fabric. He smells the cloth.

Róża, he says.

I look at him. These last years have dried out his body. More and more often he looks away, hides his gaze, darts it aside. He cannot hold a look or return one. I would like to see him stronger, I think.

He turns and says, Come with me.

I go.

He heads for the workshop.

Once there, from hazel he knocks together something in the shape of a cross and dresses it in grandmother's blood-red dress. He studies his work. He adjusts the little foam pads that give the object an expression of surprise, as though something living were lifting its arms.

Will it do?, he asks.

It will do, I answer.

I know he needs my yes. Here, in the illness, there is no room for refusal.

Grandfather says yes to my yes. He takes the dummy in his hands and walks into the orchard with the skeleton in the dress. Behind him, a procession: Dunaj the dog and Klakier the tomcat.

Grandmother watches us from the window of the western room. With her nails she claws at the skin on her cheek. I know the reflex. It is born in her whenever she looks at something. She can scratch herself all over and know nothing of it.

Grandfather sets a ladder against the trunk of the cherry tree. I assist. Carefully he places his feet on the rungs. He reaches the top. With wire he fastens the scarecrow to a branch.

A scarecrow for hunger, I say under my breath.





Grandmother's red dress begins to move in the wind. A gust enters it and fills the place where a warm body once was. I have the impression the dress has come alive.

Spirit of the orchard, I say to Ann, who joins us.

Nothing works like a red dress, she hums.

Starlings wheel above the tree.

Back in the western room I ask grandmother if she remembers wearing that thing last spring. There are photographs.

She says yes.

The red brought out her gray hair.

You know, she says, the illness must already have been in me then. Can you imagine it?

I say yes.

With my fingertips I examine the wound she has scratched into her cheek.

For the rest of the day we take turns going to the window of the western room and looking into the orchard. The blood-red of the dress merges with the cherries ripening in the full sun. We will gather the fruit saved from the starlings' beaks for grandmother. Grandfather will make sweet jams from them.





The western room





We freshen the room in the western part of the house for the illness. In my childhood it served us for years as a large cold room. We stored the meat of pigs slaughtered for church holidays there. My grandparents kept furniture here, old paintings, jars filled with preserves, jugs of honeydew honey, boxes filled with Christmas decorations. After the tragedy, the one from many years ago that befell my parents and my aunt, grandmother has her den here.





Soon they'll fit radiators in here, grandfather says, standing on the threshold of the room.

Yes, I say yes.

Grandmother mustn't be cold in the illness, he says.

Yes, yes, I say yes.

I can still accept the cold, but take that pink out of here, grandmother says.

Yes, yes, I say yes.

Pink reminds me of meat, she says.

Yes, I say yes.

Make it white in here, she says.

I say yes.

I am obedient, that is why I came back here from far away, that is why I left my life in the ever-bright city, to be obedient.

Obedience, I say to Ann.

Obedience, she repeats and runs her hand over my hair.





Deal


We begin to freshen the room. As if the illness required special measures and actions from us.

We collaborate with it, we deal, I think.

It has us too now, I say to Ann, handing her the overalls I wore here in my teens.

We work, the two of us. The illness binds us in physical labor. We need to tire ourselves out.

Grandmother's eyes are watchful.

Grandmother's eyes follow us and look, look.

Let's work ourselves to death, I say.

Grandmother keeps peering into the room, nods, and looks, looks. She likes that against the white walls the plants and holy pictures will stand out clearly.

Make it white in here, she says again.

The instructions are simple: white.

We scrape off the old layers of paint with the scraper. We pass the tool back and forth whenever the one working feels pain in her arms and forearms. I feel dust in my mouth. It grits between my teeth.





I hold the ladder Ann is standing on. She wrestles with the wall. Her arms are bare, powder settles on them. You can see clearly how her muscles work. She is beautiful when she moves the scraper. She strips away the layers of paint that have been put on here over the last thirty years. Much can be read from them. Written into them are the great occasions that called for freshening the room: baptism, first communion, confirmation, and now the illness. I recognize every color as it comes down.

Maybe if one started to study them, more could be read from them, the way changes in the environment are read from a soil profile.

The history of this house falls to the floor.

We make room for the new.

Ann is beautiful when she tenses her body, sets her thoughts in motion, speaks as she does it, when everything she is goes into motion.

We need what is bright, I say to Ann, stirring the paint.

Yes, she says yes.

We muck ourselves up with white.

At night, when the room dries, I go in to take a close look inside.

Huuuuhuuu, huuuhuuu, I hoot.

Behind me I hear Ann.

Huuuuhuuu, huuuhuuu, she repeats after me.

The sounds tremble in these dozen or so square meters.

We wheeze from the dust. We have it in our gullets. We spit white.

In the morning we show grandmother the room.

White, she says.

She presses her cool hands to our faces and strokes us, the way she strokes Dunaj when he comes home after days roaming.

Grandmother begins carrying the plants into the western room.

Life, life, she says.





After two pots of calathea she weakens. She sits down on the floor, leans against the wall. Without a word we take over her work, become her hands. We carry from the entryway to the western room the plants put there for the renovation: aloe, asparagus fern, fern, geranium, Siberian ivy, Christmas cactuses, philodendron, croton, dracaena, begonia, caladium.

Grandmother's eyes are watchful.

Grandmother's eyes follow us.

Grandmother's eyes look, look.





Hunchbacked

When the smell of paint is gone, the three of us spend the night in the western room. We do not yet know that this is how it will stay, that the nights to come will be shared. But not yet. For now the moon is waxing.

There it is, waxing, hunchbacked, I think.

I am growing used to the closeness.

We divide the bed and the daybed between us.

We take off the day's layers.

We mingle our scents.

My women, I think, falling asleep, are beautiful and fragrant, fragrant.




Throat


In the room I can hear grandmother's breathing and Ann's. Night has stilled our pupils, wild from the day. Ever since the illness moved in with us, I fall asleep last.

Only my vigil is strong, I think. No one else can keep vigil that long.

In the corner of the room the cast-iron stove gives off heat. The last days of June have brought cold here, into the valley.

Any moment now it will begin.

Light.




Light cuts our little faces. I look at Ann, whose face is lit by the headlights of a truck carrying cattle to the slaughterhouse. She opens her eyes. They are deep, bottomless. They regard the waking world, and when they notice me looking, they stop.

Ann keeps vigil with me for a moment.

But she cannot hold vigil the way I can.

She enters sleep.

And here — oh — it begins. A few dozen metres from the western room, big trucks take the bend, their headlights filling the room with light.

Bright and dark.

Bright and dark.

Bright.

Dark.

Bright.

This will last a million years.

I have time, I think.

The trucks bring animals to the slaughterhouse. I imagine the bodies of cows — warm, damp.

As a child I did not always last until this moment of the night. Sometimes I fell asleep and the spectacle, already underway, woke me. It was accompanied by sounds like tonight's: throaty, drawn-out, that instead of dissolving into space can hang over the village a long while.

The bellowing of cows.

The whimpering of dogs.

The hooting of the night.

And this too — the smell: manure, urine, sweat.

The bodies of my women are clearly visible when the Jelcz headlights light them in slow passes. Their features — depending on the light that falls, and on the shadows — are dead one moment, alive the next.

Grandmother lies on her side, her hand tucked under her left cheek. She looks like a child. A child, the kind they'd have wanted from me.




But now is not the time for life. Death — that is what fills my head. That is what I serve. Grandmother is my child. I am the mother of my grandmother. This is good, I think.

Ann's body is beside me. The porcelain of her skin, the whiteness of her hair, lashes, and brows never stops astonishing me. There is something twinlike in us, and there is also in us — and we know it — something that binds us: much that is prodigal.

The bodies of the women close to me react to the light, the eyeballs beneath their eyelids stir.

One moment more.

They open their eyes.

One after the other.

Grandmother looks and whispers into the light: Water or fire will take care of it.

Ann, woken again, sets her bare feet on the floorboards, her nails painted dark burgundy. Like mine. We paint them for each other now, no longer for our people, who are far away now. They have to stay far away, I do not let them come near the illness. I belong to the illness, not to them. There is room here only for Ann. She can plunge nails painted like that into manure or compost, wallow in it.

Sisters in decay, I think of us.

Ann pulls a pack of clubs from the pocket of grandfather's coat, which she has put on.

Come, she says to me.

I throw a blanket around myself and go. Grandmother watches the lights running across the ceiling.

Maybe, I think, she has fallen asleep again, but left her gaze awake. She is most terrifying then, when she looks in such a way that you cannot tell who her eyes belong to.

We go out onto the veranda. I feel the cold.

Concert, I say to Ann.




She hands me a lit cigarette.

It's starting, I say.

Yes, she says yes.

Oh, already.

We listen.

The hooves know no rhythm, I say.

After a while the animals begin to sing.

They're singing, I say.

Ann puts a finger to my lips and with that gesture holds the cigarette smoke inside me.

The animals sing. Their song comes from within, from warm bellies, I think.

After a while the dogs make themselves heard. First Rybowicz's wolfspitz below the embankment on the other side of the village, then the throats of the slaughterhouse dogs start up, after a moment Dunaj joins in, then Sołtysowa's Samoyeds and the dogs tethered by the rectory kennels, descendants of those restless mongrels that have been interbreeding on the margins of the village for generations. They bear the names of apostles: Marek, Jan, Łukasz. There is a black one there too, christened Murzyn by the village.

How strange, I think, that I can tell these howls apart, the melody of each dog. A little longer here and I'll be guessing what these howls are for, what they serve.

Ann takes her finger from my lips.




I say: You know, I always wanted to be the bitch of this village, to have all of Maj to myself. To know no boundaries. I was tempted to be far from what is human. To have a dog's body and act in keeping with it, give in to hunger, deny myself nothing. To fawn only on the ones I chose, to nip and bark at everything else. To be a choosy bitch. To love one human being, to have duties toward him, to obey him. And this: to disappear for many days. To have that right, to use it.

Use it, Ann repeats.

The barking carries and wakes more sounds.

The whole village howls.

Tonight this place is the deep gullet of a hungry animal, I think.




Faith


At night the slaughterhouse wakes the birds. This has consequences for the valley. Time gets mixed up. Something in time comes loose. People open their eyes at the wrong hour, go through the day dazed. At noon they look at the sun and where it is in the sky does not seem right to them.

Grandfather gets most mixed up of all. Grandfather rises with the birds. Wakefulness catches him by surprise.

I wake up and it's empty, he tells me about times like that.

Empty?, I ask.

Empty, yes, there is nothing to get hold of, nothing to recognize yourself in, he says.

He gets up at night and walks through the house. He clambers up the ladder to the attic and walks there. He takes steps; it calms him. It calms him, too, to stroke the antlers he has collected over decades. When night and day get mixed up for Grandfather, he can fall asleep there.

In the mornings, when I go to take my place at the desk to work on code, clean, intuitive, beautiful, the kind I sometimes dream of, I often find him among the antlers. Grandfather has a story for each set. He invents lives for those bones. For him to tell a story like that, you have to approach him, you have to praise the collection in the attic. The stories about deer are full of the panic of animals, of the forest, and happen in rain and in fog. Only from weather like that do animals come out of Grandfather's stories.



Rivers



Waking birds is a sin, says Grandmother.

For years now, nothing grows in the orchard belonging to the slaughterhouse. The ground there is trampled by herds of cows. Most of the animals are unloaded at the top of the hill and led straight into the concrete walls. The ones there is no room for in the cool pens are let into the orchard. They take advantage of it, empty their deep bellies, piss as if they had endless rivers inside them. Urine in such quantities scorches the earth; trees struggle to grow here.

The orchard is naked, stunted, sick.

It's the damp from inside the cows, I say.

Fire or water will take care of it, says Grandmother.

I believe her.



The greengage trees in this orchard haven't borne fruit for years, she says.

I say yes.



Sweet



Grandmother cannot resist the living. Everything living she would take into the western room, invite in. She would wish for the living to walk before her eyes, to stir, to scrabble, to flutter.

Let it strut, she says.

Let it fly, she says.

Let it be, she says.

Grandmother adores the living, always, which is to say for as long as I can remember. One could, I think, trace the generations of what has multiplied here, in the western part of the house. And if you asked those latest generations, the living ones, where they are from, they would probably, if they could talk, say: from the cool room of the human, the little human, Róża.

She wishes, I think, for the living, especially now, to occupy her mind, to breed obligations, to distract from the illness.

Grandmother studies the living with curiosity. This fondness, as I call it, this weakness, as Grandfather calls it, has made her useless so many times.

It was frightening to take Róża to the fields, Grandfather begins, reminding me at the same time of that childhood time.